---
title: 6.1 - Introduction to Eigenvalues
tags: [6 - Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors]

---

# Chapter 6 - Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors
## 6.1 Introduction to Eigenvectors

1. An **eigenvector** $\vec{x}$ lies along the same line as $A\vec{x}:\quad A\vec{x}=\lambda\vec{x}$. The **eigenvalue** is $\lambda$. 
2. If $A\vec{x}=\lambda\vec{x}$ then $A^2\vec{x}=\lambda^2\vec{x}$ and $A^{-1}\vec{x}=\lambda^{-1}\vec{x}$ and $(A+cI)\vec{x}=(\lambda+c)\vec{x}$: the same $\vec{x}$. 
3. If $A\vec{x}=\lambda\vec{x}$, then $(A-\lambda I)\,\vec{x}=\vec{0}$ and $A-\lambda I$ is singular and $\det{}(A-\lambda I)=\vec{0}$. $n$ eigenvalues.
4. Check $\lambda$'s by $\det{A}=(\lambda_1)(\lambda_2)\dots(\lambda_n)$ and the diagonal sum $a_{11}+a_{22}+\dots+a_{nn}=$ sum of $\lambda$'s. 
5. Projections of $\lambda=1$ and $0$. REflections have $1$ and $-1$. Rotations has $e^{i\theta}$ and $e^{-i\theta}$. 

---
This part of linear algebra is about change. We want some solution vector $\vec{u}(t)$ that stays in the direction of a fixed vector $\vec{x}$. We want "eigenvectors" $\vec{x}$ that don't change when you multiply by $A$. 

Certain exceptional vectors $\vec{x}$ are in the same direction as $A\vec{x}$, and thus don't change direction when multiplied. Those are called "eigenvectors". 

The basic equation is $A\vec{x}=\lambda\vec{x}$. The number $\lambda$ is an *eigenvalue* of $A$. 

When $A$ is squared, the eigenvectors remain the same. The eigenvalues are squared.

---
The eigenvectors make up the nullspace of $A-\lambda I$. 

Eigenvalues: The number $\lambda$ is an eigenvalue of $A$ if and only if $A-\lambda I$ is singular.

Equation for eigenvalues: $$\det(A-\lambda I)=0.$$ This "*characteristic polynomial*" $\det(A-\lambda I)$ involves only $\lambda$ , not $\vec{x}$. When $A$ is $n\times n$, A has degree $n$ and $n$ eigenvalues (repeats possible).

To then find the eigenvectors, solve $(A-\lambda I)\vec{x}=\vec{0}$ for each $\lambda$.

---
**Summary**: To solve the eigenvalue problem for an $n\times n$ matrix, do the following
1. ***Compute the determinant of $A-\lambda I$.*** With $\lambda$ subtracted along the diagonal, this determinant starts with $\lambda^n$ or $-\lambda^n$. It is a polynomial in $\lambda$ of degree $n$. 
2. ***Find the roots of this polynomial.*** By solving $\det(A-\lambda I)=0$. The $n$ roots are the $n$ eigenvalues of $A$. They make $A-\lambda I$ singular.
3. For each eigenvalue $\lambda$, ***solve (A-\lambda I)\vec{x}=0$ to find an eigenvector $\vec{x}$.***

---
**Determinant and Trace**
Bad news: Elimination does not preserve eigenvalues.

Good news: The product $\lambda_1$ times $\lambda_2$ and the sum $\lambda_1$ plus $\lambda_2$ can be found quickly from the matrix.

*The product of $n$ eigenvalues* **equals** *the determinant*.
*The sum of the $n$ eigenvalues* **equals** *the sum of the $n$ diagonal entries.* $$\lambda_1+\lambda_2+\dots+\lambda_n=\textbf{trace}=a_{11}+a_{22}+\dots+a_{nn}.$$

---
**Imaginary Eigenvalues**
Eigenvalues don't have to be real numbers. For example, with a rotation matrix, such as $90^\circ:Q=\begin{bmatrix}0&-1\\1&0\end{bmatrix}$, no real vector stays in the same direction. 

These complex vectors somehow keep their direction as they are rotated.

$A$ and $B$ share the same $n$ independent eigenvectors if and only if $AB=BA$. 

---
**Review of the Key Ideas**
1. $A\vec{x}=\lambda\vec{x}$ says that eigenvectors $\vec{x} keep the same direction when multiplied by $A$. 
2. $A\vec{x}=\lambda\vec{x}$ also says that $\det(A-\lambda I)=0.$ This determines $n$ eigenvalues. 
3. The eigenvalues of $A^2$ and $A^{-1}$ are $\lambda^2$ and $\lambda^{-1}$, with the same eigenvectors.
4. The sum of $\lambda$'s equals the sum down the main diagonal of $A$ (the trace). The product of $\lambda$'s  equals the determinant of $A$. 
5. Projections $P$, reflections $R$, $90^\circ$ rotations $Q$, have special eigenvalues $1,0,-1,i,-i$. Singular matrices have $\lambda=0$. Triangular matrices have $\lambda$ on their diagonal.
6. Special properties of a matrix lead to special eigenvalues and eigenvectors.

