---
title: 6.2 - Diagonalizing a Matrix
tags: [6 - Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors]

---

## 6.2 Diagonalizing a Matrix

1. The columns of $AX=X\Lambda$ are $A\vec{x}_k=\lambda_k\vec{x}_k$. The eigenvalue matrix $\Lambda$ is diagonal. 
2. $n$ independent eigenvectors in $X$ diagonalize $A$: $A=X\Lambda X^{-1}$ and $\Lambda=X^{-1}AX$. 
3. The eigenvector matrix $X$ also diagonalizes all power $A^k$: $A^k=X\Lambda^kX^{-1}$. 
4. Solve $u_{k+1}=Au_k$ by $u_k=A^ku_0=X\Lambda^kX^{-1}u_0=c_1(\lambda_1)^kx_1+\dots+c_n(\lambda_n)^kx_n$. 
5. No equal eigenvalues $\implies$ $X$ is invertible and $A$ can be diagonalized. Equal eigenvalues $\implies$ $A$ *might* have too few independent eigenvectors. Then $X^{-1}$ fails.
6. Every matrix $C=B^{-1}AB$ has the **same eigenvalues** as $A$. These $C$'s are "similar" to $A$. 

---
When $\vec{x}$ is an *eigenvector*, multiplication by $A$ is just multiplication by a number $\lambda$: $A\vec{x}=\lambda\vec{x}$. 

The matrix $A$ turns into a diagonal matrix $\Lambda$ when we use eigenvectors properly. 

---
**Diagonalization** Suppose the $n\times n$ matrix $A$ has $n$ linearly independent eigenvectors $\vec{x}_1,\dots,\vec{x}_n.$ Put them into the columns of an *eigenvalue matrix $X$*. Then $X^{-1}AX$ is the *eigenvalue matrix* $\Lambda$:$$X^{-1}AX=\Lambda=\begin{bmatrix}\lambda_1&&\\&\ddots&\\&&\lambda_n\end{bmatrix}.$$

The matrix $A$ here is *diagonalized*.

---
**Without $n$ independent eigenvectors, we cannot diagonalize.**

**Any matrix with no repeated eigenvalues can be diagonalized.**

**We can multiply eigenvectors by any nonzero constants.**

---
**Note:**
- Invertibility is concerned with eigenvalues: ($\lambda=0$ or $\lambda\neq0$).
- Diagonalizability is concerned with eigenvectors (too few or enough for $X$).

*Eigenvectors for $n$ different $\lambda$'s are independent. Then we can diagonalize $A$.*

$A^k\rightarrow$ A zero matrix when $\lambda<|1|\,\forall\,\lambda$. 

---
"Similar" matrices are the matrices that have the same eigenvalues. For these matrices, we have $A=BCB^{-1}$. 

---
**Matrix Powers $A^k$**

This helps solve difference equations, such as $u_{k+1}=Au_k\,$. To do so:
1. Write up $u_0$ as a combination of $c_1\vec{x}_1+\dots+c_n\vec{x}_n$ of the eigenvectors. Then $c=X^{-1}u_0$. 
2. Multiply each eigenvector $x_i$ by $(\lambda_i)^k$. Now we have $\Lambda^kX^{-1}u_0$.
3. Add up the pieces $c_i(\lambda_i)^k\vec{x}_i$ to find the solution $u_k=A^ku_0$. This is $X\Lambda^kX^{-1}u_0$.
4. **Solution for $u_k+1=Au_k$**: $u_k=A^ku_0=c_1(\lambda_1)^kx_1+\cdots+c_n(\lambda_n)^kx_n.$

---
**Nondiagonalizable Matrices**

Determining Geometric Multiplicity - Count the **independent eigenvectors** for $\lambda$. Then **GM** is the dimension of the nullspace $A-\lambda I$. 

Determining Algebraic Multiplicity - Count the **repetitions of $\lambda$** among the eigenvalues. Look at the $n$ roots of $\det(A-\lambda I)=0$.

---
**Review of the Key Ideas**
1. If $A$ has $n$ independent eigenvectors $x_1,\dots,x_n$, they go into the columns of $X$. $$A\textbf{ is diagonalized by }X\quad x^{-1}AX=\Lambda\text{ and }A=X\Lambda X^{-1}.$$
2. The powers of $A$ are $A^k=X\Lambda X^{-1}$. The eigenvectors in $X$ are unchanged. 
3. The eigenvalues of $A^k$ are $(\lambda_1)^k,\dots,(\lambda_n)^k$ in the matrix $\Lambda^k$. 
4. The solution to $u_{k+1}=Au_k$ starting from $u_0$ is $u_k=A^ku_0=X\Lambda^kX^{-1}u_0:$ $$u_k=c_1(\lambda_1)^kx_1+\cdots+c_n(\lambda_n)^kx_n$\text{  provided  }u_0=c_1x_1+\cdots+c_nx_n.$$
5. A is diagonalizable if every eigenvalue has enough eigenvectors (GM=AM). 

