---
title: 1.1 - Vector Algebra
tags: [1 - Vector Analysis]

---

# 1.1 Vector Algebra
The notes in this book will be largely terse compared to many others, with focus on simply highlighting major ideas followed by simple exercises. 

I will be reading the Feynman lectures to generate more intuition, and after this I will work on Jackson. Thus the goal of my notes here are try and be humble about the gap in my undergraduate education, in part from the coursework and the majority from my own failures as a student. I see this quick pass through this book as another failure, and a mistake, but I must admit I am driven by a feeling of inadequacy generated due to my own failings as a student of physics. 
## 1.1.1 Vector Operations

We define four operations: 
- Addition of two vectors: $\vec{A}+\vec{B}$
- Multiplication by a scalar: $a\vec{A}$
- Dot product of vectors: $\vec{A}\cdot\vec{B}$
- Cross product of two vectors: $\vec{A}\times\vec{B}$

Dot: $\vec{A}\cdot\vec{B}\equiv|\vec{A}|\,|\vec{B}|\cos{\theta}.$

Cross: $\vec{A}\times\vec{B}\equiv|\vec{A}|\,|\vec{B}|\sin{\theta}\,\hat{n}$, where $\hat{n}$ is a unit vector perpendicular to the plane of $\vec{A}$ and $\vec{B}$. 

## 1.1.2 Vector Algebra: Component Form

Vectors have components.

## 1.1.3 Triple Products

$$\vec{A}\cdot(\vec{B}\times\vec{C})=\begin{vmatrix}\vec{A}_x&\vec{A}_y&\vec{A}_z\\\vec{B}_x&\vec{B}_y&\vec{B}_z\\\vec{C}_x&\vec{C}_y&\vec{C}_z\end{vmatrix}$$

It's the volume of a box.

Vector triple product:$$\vec{A}\times(\vec{B}\times\vec{C})=\vec{B}(\vec{A}\cdot\vec{C})-C(\vec{A}\cdot\vec{B})$$
"BAC-CAB rule".

## 1.1.4 Position, Displacement, and Seperation Vectors

Position vector is the vector from the origin to the cartesian coordinates $(x,y,z)$:$$\vec{r}\equiv x\hat{x}+y\hat{y}+z\hat{z}.$$

This book using a seperation vector defined as $$\mathcal{R}\equiv r-r'$$$$\hat{\mathcal{R}}=\frac{(x-x')\hat{x}+(y-y')\hat{y}+(z-z')\hat{z}}{\sqrt{(x-x')^2+(y-y')^2+(z-z')^2}}$$

## 1.1.5 How Vectors Transform

With tensors.