---
title: 4.4 - Orthonormal Bases and Gram-Schmidt
tags: [4 - Orthogonality]

---

## 4.4 Orthonormal Bases and Gram-Schmidt

1. The columns $q_1,\dots,q_n$ are orthonormal if $q_i^\text{T}q_j=\begin{cases}0\text{ for }i\neq j\\1 \text{ for }i=j\end{cases}$, then $Q^\text{T}Q=I$. 
2. If $Q$ is also square, then $QQ^\text{T}=I$ and $Q^\text{T}=Q^{-1}$. $Q$ is an "orthogonal matrix".
3. The least squares solution to $Q\vec{x}=\vec{b}$ is $\hat{x}=Q^\text{T}\,\vec{b}$. Projection of $\vec{b}:\vec{p}=QQ^\text{T}\,\vec{b}=P\,\vec{b}$. 
4. The **Gram-Schmidt** process takes independent $a_i$ to orthonormal $q_i$. Start with $q_1=a_1/\|a_1\|$. 
5. $\vec{q}_i$ is ($\vec{a}_i-$projection $\vec{p}_i\,$)/$\,\|a_i-p_i\|$; projection $\vec{p}_i=(a_i^\text{T}q_1+\dots+(a_i^\text{T}q_{i-1})q_{i-1}.$
6. Each $a_i$ will be a combination of $q_1$ to $q_i$. Then $A=QR:$ orthogonal $Q$ and triangular $R$. 

---
Vectors are orthonormal when they are orthogonal and normalized. This book provides a lot of definitions but if I didn't know this like the back of my hand from quantum I'd probably be executed at my job and by my professors.

A matrix with orthonormal columns is denoted by $Q$ and obeys $Q^\text{T}Q=I$. This is the quickest test to determine if a matrix is orthogonal. Three examples:


**Rotation**$$Q=\begin{bmatrix}\cos\theta&-\sin\theta\\\sin\theta&\cos\theta\end{bmatrix}.$$

**Permutation** $$\begin{bmatrix}0&1&0\\0&0&1\\1&0&0\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}x\\y\\z\end{bmatrix}=\begin{bmatrix}y\\z\\x\end{bmatrix}.$$

**Reflection** $$Q^\text{T}=I-2\vec{u}\vec{u}^\text{T}=Q.$$

---
**Projections Using Orthonormal Bases: $Q$ Replaces $A$.**
This means that for $A^\text{T}A$ this goes to $Q^\text{T}Q=I$, simplifying things. 

---
**The Gram-Schmidt Process**
Gram-Schmidt is a process to create orthonormal vectors:

First choose a direction $\vec{a}$ and normalize it $A=\frac{\vec{a}}{\|\vec{a}\|}$. 

Then pick a $B$ which is perpendicular to $A$ and subtract its projection along $A$:$$B=\vec{b}-\frac{A^\text{T}\vec{b}}{A^\text{T}A}A.$$Afterwards, pick another direction $\vec{c}$ which is not a combination of $A$ and $B$, then repeat the above process: $$C=\vec{c}-\frac{A^\text{T}\vec{c}}{A^\text{T}A}A-\frac{B^\text{T}\vec{c}}{B^\text{T}B}B.$$ then repeat this process continuously until you've done so for all directions. The resulting vectors are orthonormal. 

The matrix factorization $A=QR$ is Gram-Schmidt in a nutshell. 

---
**Review of the Key Ideas**
1. If the orthonormal vectors $q_1,\dots,q_n$ are the columns of $Q$, then $q_i^\text{T}q_j=0$ and $q_i^\text{T}q_i=1$ translate into the matrix multiplication $Q^\text{T}Q=I.$
2. If $Q$ is square (an orthogonal matrix) then $Q^\text{T}=Q^{-1}$: (Transpose=Inverse).
3. The length of $Q\vec{x}$ equals the length of $\vec{x}:\|Q\vec{x}\|=\|\vec{x}\|$. 
4. The projection onto the column space of $Q$ spanned by the $q$'s is $P=QQ^\text{T}$. 
5. If $Q$ is square, then $P=QQ^\text{T}=I$ and every $\vec{b}=\vec{q}_1(\vec{q}_1^\text{T}\vec{b})+\dots+q_n(q_n^\text{T}\vec{b})$
6. Gram-Schmidt produces orthonormal vectors $q_1,q_2,q_3$ from independent $a,b,c.$ In matrix form this is the factorization $A=QR$. 