---
title: 5.1 - The Properties of Determinates
tags: [5 - Determinates]

---

# Chapter 5 - Determinates
## 5.1 - The Properties of Determinates

1. The **determinant** of $A=\begin{bmatrix}a&b\\c&d\end{bmatrix}$ is $ad-bc$. Singular matrix $A=\begin{bmatrix}a&xa\\c&xc\end{bmatrix}$ has $\mathrm{det}=0$. 
2. $\begin{array}\text{Row Exchange}\\\text{reverses signs}\end{array}$ $PA=\begin{bmatrix}0&1\\1&0\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}a&b\\c&d\end{bmatrix}=\begin{bmatrix}c&d\\a&b\end{bmatrix}$ has $\mathrm{det}\,PA=bc-ad=-\mathrm{det}\,A$. 
3. The determinate of $\begin{bmatrix}xa+yA&xb+yB\\c&d\end{bmatrix}$ is $x(ad-bc)+y(Ad-Bc).$
4. **Elimination** $EA=\begin{bmatrix}a&b\\0&d-\frac{c}{a}b\end{bmatrix}$. $\mathrm{det}\,EA=a(d-\frac{c}{a}b)$ = **product of pivots** = $\mathrm{det}\,A$. 
5. If $A$ is $n\times n$ then $1,2,3,4$ remain true: $\mathrm{det}=0$ when $A$ is singular. **det reverses sign** when rows are exchanged, $\mathrm{det}$ = **product of pivots**. Always $\mathrm{det}\,BA=(\mathrm{det}\,B)(\mathrm{det}\,A)$ and $\mathrm{det}A^\text{T}=\mathrm{det}\,A$ . This is an amazing number.

---
The determinant of a matrix is a single number. It contains a large amount of information about the matrix. When the determinant is zero the matrix has no inverse. 

When $A$ is invertible the determinant of $A^{-1}$ is $1/\mathrm{det}\,A$. 

The determinant is the product of pivots.

---
*Looking ahead* 
The determinant of an $n\times n$ matrix can be found in three ways:
1. Multiply the $n$ pivots (times 1 or -1). This is the **pivot formula**.
2. Add up $n!$ terms (times 1 or -1). This is the **"big" formula**. 
3. Combine $n$ smaller determinants (times 1 or -1) This is the **cofactor formula**.

---
Row exchange reverses the signs of the determinant. 

First we'll start with the properties of the determinant and then hit applications of the determinant, such as:
1. Determinants give $A^{-1}$ and $A^{-1}\vec{b}$ (This formula is called **Cramer's Rule**)
2. When the edges of the box are the rows of $A$, the volume is $|\mathrm{det}\,A|$. 
3. For $n$ special numbers $\lambda$, called *eigencalues*, the determinant of $A-\lambda I$ is zero. 

---
**The properties of the Determinant**
1. The determinant of the $n\times n$ identity matrix is $1$. 
2. The determinant changes signs when two rows are exchanged (sign reversal).
3. The determinant is a linear function of each row seperately. 
4. If two rows of $A$ are equal, then $\mathrm{det}\,A=0$. 
5. Subtracting a multiple of one row from another row leaves $\mathrm{det}\,A$ unchanged. 
6. A matrix with a row of zeros has $\mathrm{det}\,A=0$. 
7. If $A$ is triangular then $\mathrm{det}\,A=a_{11}a_{22}\dots a_{nn}=$ product of diagonal entries.
8. If $A$ is singular, then $\det{A}=0.$ If $A$ is invertible then $A\neq0$. 
9. The determinant of $AB$ is $\det{A}$ times $\det{B}$: $|AB|=|A|\,|B|$. 
10. The transpose $A^\text{T}$ has the same determinant as $A$. 

---
**Review of the Key Ideas**
1. The determinant is defined by $\det{I}=1$, sign reversal, and linearity in each row.
2. After elimination $\det{A}$ is $\pm$(product of the pivots).
3. The determinant is zero exactly when $A$ is not invertible.
4. Two remarkable properties are $\det{AB}=(\det{A})(\det{B})$ and $(\det{A^\text{T}}=\det{A})$. 

---
Practice problems here seem important and are done on paper. 