---
title: 3.1 - Spaces of Vectors
tags: [3 - Vector Spaces and Subspaces]

---

# Chapter 3 - Vector Spaces and Subspaces
## 3.1 Spaces of Vectors
1. The standard $n$-dimensional $\mathbb{R}^n$ contains all real column vectors with $n$ components.
2. If $\vec{v}$ and $\vec{w}$ are in a **vector space** $S$, every combination $c\vec{v}+d\vec{w}$ must be in $S$. 
3. The "vectors" in $S$ can be matrices or functions of $x$. The 1-point space $Z$ consists of $x=0$. 
4. A **subspace** of $\mathbb{R}^n$ is a vector space inside $\mathbb{R}^n$. Example, the line $y=3x$ inside $\mathbb{R}^2$.
5. The **column space** of $A$ contains all combinations of the columns of $A$: A subspace of $\mathbb{R}^m$. 
6. The column space contains all the vectors $A\vec{x}$, so $A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$ is solvable when $\vec{b}$ is in $C(A)$.

---
**Definition**: *The space $\mathbb{R}^n$ consists of all column vectors $\vec{v}$ with $n$ components.*

The space of $\mathbb{R}^n$ is that of vectors of real numbers. If a vector's $n$ components are complex, it lies in the space $\mathbb{C}^n$. 

Linear combinations retain the same vector space that the component vectors live in. 

Here are three vector spaces other than $\mathbb{R}$:
- $\mathbb{M}$: The vector space of *all real $2\times2$ matrices.*
- $\mathbb{F}$: The vector space of *all real functions* f(x).
- $\mathbb{Z}$: The vector space that consists only of a *zero vector*. 

The function space $\mathbb{F}$ is infinite dimensional. A smaller function space is $\mathbb{P}$, or $\mathbb{P}_n$, containing all polynomials $a_0+a_1\,x+\dots+a_n\,x^n$ of degree $n$. 

---
**Subspaces**

**Definition**: A *subspace* of a vector space is a set of vectors (including $\vec{0}$) that satisfies two requirements: $If $\vec{v}$ and $\vec{w}$ are vectors in the subspace and $c$ is any scalar, then:
1. $\vec{v}+\vec{w}$ is in the subspace
2. $c\vec{v}$ is in the subspace.

**All linear combinations stay in the subspace. They are closed under addition and multiplication.**

Here are some subspaces:
- $\mathbb{L}$ - Any line through $(0,0,0)$.
- $\mathbb{R^3}$ - The whole space.
- $\mathbb{P}$ - Any plane through $(0,0,0)$.
- $\mathbb{Z}$ - The single vector $(0,0,0)$. 

*A subspace containing $\vec{v}$ and $\vec{w}$ must contain all lonear combnations $c\vec{v}+d\vec{w}$. 

---
**The Column Space of $A$**

**Definition**: The *column space* consists of *all linear combinations of the columns*. The combinations are all possible vectors $A\vec{x}$. They fill the column space $C(A)$. 

*The system $A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$ is solvable if and only if $\vec{b}$ is in the column space of $A$.*

---
**Review of the Key Ideas**
1. $\mathbb{R}^n$ contains all column vectors with $n$ real components. 
2. $\mathbb{M}\:\:(2\times2\text{ matrices})$ and $\mathbb{F}$ (functions) and $\mathbb{Z}$ (zero vector alone) are vector spaces.
3. A subspace containing $\vec{v}$ and $\vec{w}$ must contain all of their combinations $c\vec{v}+d\vec{w}$.
4. The combination of the columns of $A$ form the *column space* $C(A)$. Then the column space is "spanned" by the columns. 
5. $A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$ has a solution exactly when $\vec{b}$ has a solution exactly when $\vec{b}$ is in the column space of $A$. $$C(A)=\text{ all combinations of the columns }=\text{ all vectors }A\vec{x}.$$ 