---
title: '3.2 - The Nullspace of A: Solving Ax=0 and Rx=0'
tags: [3 - Vector Spaces and Subspaces]

---

## 3.2 The Nullspace of $A$: Solving $A\vec{x}=0$ and $R\vec{x}=0$. 

1. The **nullspace** $\mathbb{N(A)}$ in $\mathbb{R}^n$ contains all solutions of $\vec{x}$ to $A\vec{x}=0$. This includes $\vec{x}=0$. 
2. Elimination (from $A$ to $U$ to $R$) does not change the nullspace: $\mathbb{N}(A)=\mathbb{N}(U)=\mathbb{N}(R)$. 
3. The **reduced row echelon form** $R=\mathrm{rref}(A)$ has all pivots $=1$, with zeros above and below. 
4. If column $j$ of $R$ is free (n pivot), there is a "*special solution*" to $A\vec{x}=0$ with $\vec{x}_j=1$. 
5. Number of pivots = number of nonzero rows in $R=\text{rank } r$. There are $n-r$ free columns. 
6. Every matrix with $m<n$ has nonzero solutions to $A\vec{x}=0$ in its nullspace. 

---

The nullspace $\mathbb{N}(A)$ consists of all solutions to $A\vec{x}=0.$ These vectors $\vec{x}$ are in $\mathbb{R}^n$. 

A special solution is a choice of solution $A\vec{s}=0$ for the matrix $A$ such that all linear combinations of $\vec{s}$ lie in the nullspace. 

---

Two key steps of this section are:
1. Reducing $A$ to its row echelon form $R$.
2. Finding the special solutions to $A\vec{x}=0$. 

---
**Pivot Columns and Free Columns**

*The free components correspond to columns with no pivots.*

---
**The Reduced Row Echelon Form $R$**

1. *Produce zeros above the pivots.* **Use pivot rows to eliminate upwards in $R$.**
2. *Produce ones in the pivots.* **Divide the whole pivot row by its pivot.**


Example: $$U=\begin{bmatrix}1&2&2&4\\0&2&0&4\end{bmatrix}\quad\text{becomes}\quad R=\begin{bmatrix}1&0&2&0\\0&1&0&2\end{bmatrix}.$$

---
Suppose $A\vec{x}=0$ has more unknowns than equations ($n>m$, more columns than rows). There must be at least one free column. Then $A\vec{x}=0$ has nonzero solutions.

---
**The Rank of a Matrix**
*The true size of $A$ is given by its rank*.

**Definition of rank**: The rank of $A$ is the number of pivots. This number is $r$. 

Matrices of rank one have only one pivot. The column space is one dimension and all lies on the line. 

---
**Review of the Key Ideas**

1. The nullspace $\mathbb{N}(A)$ is a subspace of $\mathbb{R}^n$. It contains all solutions to $A\vec{x}=0$. 
2. Elimination of $A$ produces a row reduced $R$ with pivot columns and free columns. 
3. Every free column leads to a special solution. That free variable is 1, the others are 0. 
4. The *rank $r$*  of $A$ is the number of pivots. All pivots are $1$'s in $R=\mathrm{rref}(A).$ 
5. The complete solution to $A\vec{x}=0$ is a combination of the $n-r$ special solutions.
6. $A$ always has a free column if $n>m$, giving a *nonzero solution* to $A\vec{x}=0$. 