---
title: 3.3 - The Complete Solution to Ax=b
tags: [3 - Vector Spaces and Subspaces]

---

## 3.3 - The Complete Solution to $A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$. 

1. Complete Solution to $A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$: $\vec{x}=$ (one particular solution $x_p$)+(any $x_n$ in the nullspace).
2. Elimination on $[\,A\quad\vec{b}\,]$ leads to $[\,R\quad\vec{d}\,]$. Then $A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$ is equivalent to $R\vec{x}=\vec{d}$.  
3. $A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$ and $R\vec{x}=\vec{d} are solvable only when all zero rows of $R$ have zeros in $\vec{d}$.
4. When $R\vec{x}=\vec{d}$ is solvable, one very particular solution $x_p$ has all free variables equal to zero.
5. $A$ has **full column rank** $r=n$ when its nullspace $\mathbb{N}(A)=\vec{0}$: *no free variables*.
6. $A$ has **full row rank** $r=m$ when it's column space $\mathbb{C}(A)$ is $\mathbb{R}^m: A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$ is always solvable.
7. The four cases are $r=m=n$ ($A$ is invertible), and $r=m<n$ (every $A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$ is solvable) and $r=n<m$ ($A\vec{x}=b$ has $1$ or $0$ solutions), and $r<m, r<n$ ($0$ or $\infty$ solutions).

---
Essentially, this section solves similarly to an invertible square matrix, but for the four different cases by checking the rank of the matrix, which is then evaluated akin to 7 above. 

---
Every matrix $A$ with **Full column rank** ($r=n$) has these properties:
1. All columns of $A$ are pivot columns.
2. There are no free variables or special solutions.
3. The nullspace $\mathbb{N}(A)$ contains only the zero vector $\vec{x}=0$. 
4. If $A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$ has a solution (it might not), then it has only one solution. 

---
**The Complete Solution**
The complete solution is the combination of the particular solution and the null solution: $$x=x_p+x_n.$$

---
Every matrix $A$ with **full row rank** ($r=m$) has these properties:
1. All rows have pivots, and $R$ has no zero rows.
2. $A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$ has a solution for every right side $\vec{b}$. 
3. The column space is the whole space $\mathbb{R}^m$. 
4. There are $n-r=n-m$ special solutions in the nullspace of $A$. 

---
**Review of the Key Ideas**
1. The rank $r$ is the number of pivots. The matrix $R$ has $m-r$ zero rows.
2. $A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$ is solvable if and only if the last $m-r$ equations reduce to $0=0$. 
3. One particular solution $x_p$ has all free variables set to zero.
4. The pivot variables are determined after the free variables are chosen.
5. Full column rank $r=n$ means no free variables: one solution or none.
6. Full row rank $r=m$ means one solution if $m=n$ or infinitely many $m<n$. 