---
title: 2.2 - The Idea of Elimination
tags: [2 - Solving Linear Equations]

---

## 2.2 The Idea of Elimination
1. For $m=n=3$, there are three equations $A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$ and three unknowns $x_1, x_2, x_3$. 
2. The first two equations are $a_{11}x_1+\dots=b_1$ and $a_{21}x_1+\dots=b_2$. 
3. Multiply the first equation by $a_{21}/a_{11}$ and subtract from the second: then $x_1$ **is eliminated**.
4. The corner entry $a_{11}$ is the first "pivot" and the ratio $a_{21}/a_{11}$ is the first "multiplier".
5. Eliminating $x_1$ from every remaining equation $i$ by subtracting $a_{i1}/a_{11}$ times the first equation.
6. Now the last $n-1$ equations contain $n-1$ unknowns $x_2,\dots,x_n$. *Repeat to eliminate $x_2$*.
7. Elimination breaks down if zero appears i the pivot. Exchanging two equations may save it. 

---
The goal of elimination is to generate an upper triangular matrix:
$$\textbf{Before}\quad\quad\begin{aligned}{1}x-2y=1\\3x+2y=11\end{aligned}$$$$\textbf{After}\quad\quad\begin{aligned}{1}x-2y=1\\8y=8\end{aligned}$$ Which allows us to easily solve from the bottom up, which is called **back substitution**. 

To do this, we subtract a multiple of equation 1 from equation 2 to remove a variable, we call this **elimination**. 

Here we say the first **pivot** was 1, and the first **multiplier** was 3.

$$\textbf{Pivot}= \text{first nonzero in the row that does the elimination.}$$$$\textbf{Multiplier}=\text{ (entry to eliminate) divided by (pivot).}$$

---
**Review of the Key Ideas**
1. A linear system $(A\vec{x}=\vec{b})$ becomes **upper trianglular** $(U\vec{x}=c)$ after elimination.
2. We **subtract** $\ell_{ij}$ times equation $j$ from equation $i$, to make the $(i,j)$ entry zero.
3. The **multiplier** is $\ell_{ij}=\frac{\text{entry to eliminate in row }i}{\text{pivot in row }j}$. **Pivots** can not be zero!
4. When zero is in the pivot position, **exchange rows** if there is a nonzero below it. 
5. The upper triangular $U\vec{x}=\vec{c}$ is solved by **back substitution** (starting at the bottom).
6. When **breakdown** is permanent, $A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$ has no solution or infinitely many. 

---
**Exercises** 
Again these are done on paper, and likely will be for this whole book.
