---
title: '2.6 - Elimination = Factorization: A=LU'
tags: [2 - Solving Linear Equations]

---

# 2.6 Elimination = Factorization: $A=LU$

1. Each elimination step $E_{ij}$ is inverted by $L_{ij}\,$. Off the main diagonal change $-\ell_{ij}$ to $+\ell_{ij}\,$. 
2. The whole forward elimination process (with no row exchanges) in verted by $L$:$$L=(L_{21}L_{31}\dots L_{n1}(L_{32}\dots L_{n2})(L_{43}\dots L_{n3})\dots(L_{n\,n-1}).$$
3. That product matrix $L$ is still lower triangular. **Every multiplier $\ell_{ij}$ is in row $i$, column $j$**.
4. The original $A$ is recovered from $U$ by $A=LU=$ (lower triangular)(upper triangular).
5. Elimination on $A\vec{x}=\vec{b}$ reaches $U\vec{x}=\vec{c}$, then back substitution solves $U\vec{x}=\vec{c}$. 
6. Solving a triangular system takes $\frac{n^2}{2}$ multiply-subtracts. Elimination to find $U$ takes $\frac{n^3}{3}.$

---
The factors $L$ and $U$ are triangular matrices. The factorization that comes from elimination is $A=LU$. 

When a row of $A$ starts with zeros, so does that row of $L$. 
When a column of $A$ starts with zeros, so does that column of $U$. 

---
Whatever the size of $A$; with no row exchanges, we have $A=LU$. 

The triangular factorization can be written $A=LU$ or $A=LDU$. 

---
This section is largely just on how LU can be used to numerically 'store' information about how to repeatedly solve a matrix $A$ for different $\vec{b}$, but I don't feel it's well motivated or explained by this book, and not super relevant for what I need. I understand it conceptually and can calculate it, so I will not be doing any practice here and quickly moving on. The key idea of this section can be seen in computational cost highlighted by $6.$ above. If I need to calculate computationally from scratch, I'll revisit the topic. 
