---
title: 1.1 - Introduction
tags: [1 - Geometry and Complex Arithmetic]

---

# 1. Geometry and Complex Arithmetic
## 1.1 Introduction
### 1.1.1 Historical Sketch
Roughly 500 years have passed since the introduction of complex numbers, but advancement was quiet for a large part of 250 years following. Descartes, Fermat, Leibniz, and even Newton failed to see their utility. 

Leibniz described $i$ as "that amphibian between existence and nonexistence". 

Gauss and Argand developed the complex plane as a way to visualize complex numbers and introduce a geometry into them. 

The rules for addition and multiplication of complex numbers is largely similar to those of vectors, with this less obvious result:
*The length of $AB$ is the product of the lengths of $A$ and $B$, and the angle of $AB$ is the sum of angles $A$ and $B$.*

After the discovery of the complex plane, it took about 37 years to develop a theory of how to do calculus with complex numbers. 

---
### 1.1.2 Bombelli's "Wild Thought"
Cardano ran into complex numbers and dismissed them when studying the quadratic, and that fact is often distorted by historical fiction, stating that the quadratic forced complex numbers to be taken seriously. But, as a study of mathematics holding very close to geometry, these solutions were immediately tossed for cases when $y=x^2$ intersecting the line $y=mx+c$, because the complex solutions do not include an intersection.

Instead, it was the cubic that forced complex numbers to be taken seriously. 

Bombelli discovered the solutions to a cubic equation, $x^3=15x+4$, specifically, to have a solution $$x=\sqrt[3]{2+11i}+\sqrt[3]{2-11i}.$$, but there is always a real number solution to the intersection of a line and a cubic (we can ssee here, $x=4$). He had the "wild thought" that perhaps these had the form $2\pm in$, and was able to determine that $(2\pm i)^3=2\pm11i$. 

This showed that complex numbers were required for perfectly real problems.